GTFS-Flex (#388)
google/transit: gtfs/spec/en/reference.md

Reviewer: Suggestion, add additional text  in line 259: "On-demand service within locations and stop areas should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available in those areas. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the pickup/drop_off_type of those stop_times and the time constraints of each start/end_pickup_drop_off_window."

Reviewer 2: I like this. As said elsewhere I had assumed that this is the case and I'm glad that this clarifies it.

Author: Thanks! commit pushed - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/d69e1574257cc0e839f05678b0adb52d734bdd4f

Note: related to [mobilitydata/gtfs-flex issue#76](https://github.com/MobilityData/gtfs-flex/issues/76)

Content here may be modified once we got consensus on [issue#398](https://github.com/google/transit/issues/398)

|  [transfers.txt](#transferstxt)  | Optional | Rules for making connections at transfer points between routes. |
|  [pathways.txt](#pathwaystxt)  | Optional | Pathways linking together locations within stations. |
|  [levels.txt](#levelstxt)  | **Conditionally Required** | Levels within stations.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** when describing pathways with elevators (`pathway_mode=5`).<br>- Optional otherwise. |
|  [locations.geojson](#locationsgeojson)  | Optional | GeoJSON locations, which are `Polygon` and `MultiPolygon` features that indicate groups of lat/lon coordinates defining zones where riders can request either pickup or drop off. |

> |  [booking_rules.txt](#booking_rulestxt)  | Optional | Booking information for rider-requested services. |

Reviewer 2: I would have expected `location_groups.txt` to be listed here.

|  [transfers.txt](#transferstxt)  | Optional | Rules for making connections at transfer points between routes. |
|  [pathways.txt](#pathwaystxt)  | Optional | Pathways linking together locations within stations. |
|  [levels.txt](#levelstxt)  | **Conditionally Required** | Levels within stations.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** when describing pathways with elevators (`pathway_mode=5`).<br>- Optional otherwise. |

> |  [location.groups.txt](#location_groupstxt)  | Optional | A group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off. |

Reviewer 3: Should this be an underscore rather than a dot?
```suggestion
|  [location_groups.txt](#location_groupstxt)  | Optional | A group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off. |
```

|  `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id`, `stop_areas.area_id`, or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies the serviced stop. All stops serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Referenced locations must be stops/platforms, i.e. their `stops.location_type` value must be `0` or empty. A stop may be serviced multiple times in the same trip, and multiple trips and routes may service the same stop.<br><br>If service is on demand, a GeoJSON location or stop area can be referenced:<br>-&nbsp;`id` from `locations.geojson`<br>-&nbsp;`stop_areas.area_id` |

> |  `stop_sequence` | Non-negative integer | **Required** | Order of stops for a particular trip. The values must increase along the trip but do not need to be consecutive.<hr>*Example: The first location on the trip could have a `stop_sequence`=`1`, the second location on the trip could have a `stop_sequence`=`23`, the third location could have a `stop_sequence`=`40`, and so on.* <br><br> Travel within the same stop area or GeoJSON location requires two records in `stop_times.txt` with the same `stop_id` and consecutive values of `stop_sequence`. |

Reviewer 2: Actually, do they need to be consecutive or can they be simply increasing as long as there is no stop_sequence in between?

Reviewer 4: Yes, I think this is right. The requirement for stop_sequence should probably just match the language of the core spec ("The values must increase along the trip but do not need to be consecutive.").

Author: Thanks for catching this!

Removed "and consecutive values of `stop_sequence`" in `stop_sequence`. It seems original description already cover it so I didn't add any additional sentence. Please let me know if you have other suggestion.

| `start_pickup_drop_off_window` | Time | **Conditionally Required** | Time that on-demand service becomes available in a GeoJSON location, stop area or stop.<br><br>**Conditionally Required**:<br>-&nbsp;**Required** if `stop_times.stop_id` refers to `stop_areas.area_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson`. <br>-&nbsp;**Forbidden** if `stop_times.arrival_time` or `stop_times.departure_time` are defined.  |
| `end_pickup_drop_off_window` | Time | **Conditionally Required** | Time that on-demand service ends in a GeoJSON location, stop area or stop.<br><br>**Conditionally Required**:<br>-&nbsp;**Required** if `stop_times.stop_id` refers to `stop_areas.area_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson`. <br>-&nbsp;**Forbidden** if `stop_times.arrival_time` or `stop_times.departure_time` are defined. |

> |  `pickup_type` | Enum | Optional | Indicates pickup method. Valid options are:<br><br>`0` or empty - Regularly scheduled pickup. <br>`1` - No pickup available.<br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange pickup.<br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange pickup.<br><br>  **Conditionally Forbidden**: <br>- `pickup_type=0` **forbidden** for `stop_times.stop_id` referring to `stop_areas.area_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson`.<br> - `pickup_type=3` **forbidden** for `stop_areas.area_id` or `locations.geojson`.<br> - Optional otherwise. |

Reviewer 5: why do we want both 0 and empty have the same meaning? Why not chose either one of them to be the only option?

|  `shape_dist_traveled` | Non-negative float | Optional | Actual distance traveled along the associated shape, from the first stop to the stop specified in this record. This field specifies how much of the shape to draw between any two stops during a trip. Must be in the same units used in [shapes.txt](#shapestxt). Values used for `shape_dist_traveled` must increase along with `stop_sequence`; they must not be used to show reverse travel along a route.<hr>*Example: If a bus travels a distance of 5.25 kilometers from the start of the shape to the stop,`shape_dist_traveled`=`5.25`.*|
|  `timepoint` | Enum | Optional | Indicates if arrival and departure times for a stop are strictly adhered to by the vehicle or if they are instead approximate and/or interpolated times. This field allows a GTFS producer to provide interpolated stop-times, while indicating that the times are approximate. Valid options are:<br><br>`0` - Times are considered approximate.<br>`1` or empty - Times are considered exact. |

> | `pickup_booking_rule_id` | ID referencing `booking_rules.booking_rule_id` | Optional | Identifies the boarding booking rule at this stop time.<br><br>Recommended when `pickup_type=2`. |

Reviewer 5: Unclear what is the difference/relation between pickup_type and pickup_booking_rule_id. At first glance they seem to overlap semantically. Please clarify

Reviewer 4: `pickup_type` indicates pickup method, e.g., does the rider need to hail the vehicle to be picked up, is there no pickup, or does the rider need to call the agency to arrange pickup in advance?

`pickup_booking_rule_id` refers to the specific booking rule found in booking_rules.txt for cases where the rider needs to schedule in advance (`pickup_type=2`)

|  `departure_time` | Time | **Conditionally Required** | Departure time from the stop (defined by `stop_times.stop_id`) for a specific trip (defined by `stop_times.trip_id`).<br><br>If there are not separate times for arrival and departure at a stop, `arrival_time` and `departure_time` should be the same. <br><br>For times occurring after midnight on the service day, enter the time as a value greater than 24:00:00 in HH:MM:SS local time for the day on which the trip schedule begins.<br><br> If exact arrival and departure times (`timepoint=1` or empty) are not available, estimated or interpolated arrival and departure times (`timepoint=0`) should be provided.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** for `timepoint=1`.<br>-&nbsp;**Forbidden** when `stop_times.start_pickup_drop_off_window` or `stop_times.end_pickup_drop_off_window` are defined.<br>- Optional otherwise.| |

> |  `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Conditionally Required** | Identifies the serviced stop. All stops serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Referenced locations must be stops/platforms, i.e. their `stops.location_type` value must be `0` or empty. A stop may be serviced multiple times in the same trip, and multiple trips and routes may service the same stop.<br><br>On-demand service using stops should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available at those stops. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up at one stop or in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the `pickup/drop_off_type` of those stop_times and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if `stop_times.location_group_id` AND `stop_times.location_id` are NOT defined.<br>- **Forbidden** if `stop_times.location_group_id` or `stop_times.location_id` are defined. |

Reviewer 4: I agree we should simplify the language. I would actually go further though:

"A data consumer should assume that travel is possible from one stop or location to any stop or location later in the trip, provided that the `pickup/drop_off_type` of each stop_time and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window` do not forbid it."

> |  `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Conditionally Required** | Identifies the serviced stop. All stops serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Referenced locations must be stops/platforms, i.e. their `stops.location_type` value must be `0` or empty. A stop may be serviced multiple times in the same trip, and multiple trips and routes may service the same stop.<br><br>On-demand service using stops should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available at those stops. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up at one stop or in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the `pickup/drop_off_type` of those stop_times and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if `stop_times.location_group_id` AND `stop_times.location_id` are NOT defined.<br>- **Forbidden** if `stop_times.location_group_id` or `stop_times.location_id` are defined. |

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Language simplified - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/7dee9298242a4ea4febd3cb13741dc37c4d2c48f

> |  `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Conditionally Required** | Identifies the serviced stop. All stops serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Referenced locations must be stops/platforms, i.e. their `stops.location_type` value must be `0` or empty. A stop may be serviced multiple times in the same trip, and multiple trips and routes may service the same stop.<br><br>On-demand service within locations should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available in those locations. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up at one stop or in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the `pickup/drop_off_type` of those stop_times and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if `stop_times.location_group_id` AND `stop_times.location_id` are NOT defined.<br>- **Forbidden** if `stop_times.location_group_id` or `stop_times.location_id` are defined. |

Reviewer 4: I recommend changing "On-demand service within locations should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available in those locations."

to

"On-demand service using stops should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available at those stops."

Author: Commit pushed - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/e428c8e75cda4e0b07a446a44acc5b0c92a2664d
Thanks!

> |  `location_group_id` | Foreign ID referencing `location_groups.location_group_id` | **Conditionally Forbidden** | Identifies the serviced location group that indicates groups of stops where riders may request pickup or drop off. All location groups serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Multiple trips and routes may service the same location group.<br><br>On-demand service within locations should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available in those locations. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up at one stop or in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the `pickup/drop_off_type` of those stop_times and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window`.<br><br>**Conditionally Forbidden**:<br>- **Forbidden** if `stop_times.stop_id` or `stop_times.location_id` are defined. |

Reviewer 4: I recommend changing "On-demand service within locations should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available in those locations."

to

"On-demand service using location groups should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available at those location groups."

Author: Commit pushed - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/e428c8e75cda4e0b07a446a44acc5b0c92a2664d
Thanks!

> |  `location_group_id` | Foreign ID referencing `location_groups.location_group_id` | **Conditionally Forbidden** | Identifies the serviced location group that indicates groups of stops where riders may request pickup or drop off. All location groups serviced during a trip must have a record in [stop_times.txt](#stop_timestxt). Multiple trips and routes may service the same location group.<br><br>On-demand service using location groups should be referenced in the sequence in which service is available at those location groups. A data consumer should assume that a rider picked up at one stop or in one location can be dropped off at any stop or in any location later in the trip, pursuant to the `pickup/drop_off_type` of those stop_times and the time constraints of each `start/end_pickup_drop_off_window`.<br><br>**Conditionally Forbidden**:<br>- **Forbidden** if `stop_times.stop_id` or `stop_times.location_id` are defined. |

Reviewer 2: Same here.

|  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |
|  ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |

> | `area_id` | Foreign ID referencing `areas.area_id` | **Required** | Identifies an area to which one or multiple `stop_id`s belong. The same `stop_id` may be defined in many `area_id`s.<br><br>May also identify a group of stops and/or GeoJSON locations that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>It is forbidden to define an `area_id` with the same value as a `stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson`. |

Reviewer 5: I understand the need to have distinct values between area_id, stop_id, geojson.id, but this is not something managable (even validation is not simple, but to do this in the DB level is very hard if not impossible)

I'm not sure how can this be improved. If the id-s are integers then it's not really possible. But if they are strings then maybe a good practice could be to use some prefix, ie: for area_id: a_123, for stop_id: s_123, for geojson_id: g_123.

Reviewer 4: We've managed to keep these values distinct at the DB level with no issue. Our `area_id`s are generated in the same table as our `stop_id`s in ascending order, so there's no risk of overlap there, and we do use a prefix for location `id`s.

Using a prefix to ensure these values don't overlap is good advice, but I do not think it needs to be a requirement of the spec.

Logically, I guess I don't see the validation hurdle: "Does this id appear in stops.txt? Does this id appear in locations.geojson? Does this id appear in areas.txt? If no to all, passes validation" seems fairly straightforward.

Reviewer 2: As a consumer (OBA, OTP) I've also had no issue with these IDs sharing a global ID space. Yes, it does make validation and lookup a bit more complicated but considering all the other complexities of the Flex spec, this is the easy part.

It's probably a good idea to prefix your IDs but that should really be left to the producer. I would not want to add any kind of ID requirements to the spec. IMO GTFS should treat them as transparent identifiers with no meta data encoded into them, which it currently does.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 4: I would be interested to hear about the experience of consumers already using these fields as they are currently designed. Where exactly does the impossibility lie?

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 5: Ok, not impossible, but it sounds like a bad design or a hack. From the sentences "Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id`, `stop_areas.area_id`, or `id` from `locations.geojson` " and "It is forbidden to define an `area_id` with the same value as a `stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson`." these are the things come to my mind: 1. this is some afterthought. 2. Is this restriction also explained in stop_areas.area_id, stops.stop_id, locations.geojson? Almost, except that in locations.id only collision with stops is forbidden, but not with stop_areas.area_id (I guess it should be added there?)

Ah, just noticed now: the field is called stop_id. It's misleading. I'm agains having a field that is "foreign ID" to 3 different fields (I don't think this counts as a foreign id, but maybe I'm too conservative) but if everyone else agrees on this, then at least let's give it a proper name. It is NOT a stop_id, so let's not call it that. Maybe geographical_reference or stop_location? BTW the same goes for stop_areas.stop_id.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 4: > Almost, except that in locations.id only collision with stops is forbidden, but not with stop_areas.area_id (I guess it should be added there?)

Yes, good catch, it should be added. @tzujenchanmbd 

> It is NOT a stop_id, so let's not call it that. Maybe geographical_reference or stop_location?

The original iteration of Flex (v1) had a separate field in stop_times to refer only to polygons, but you still had to define `stop_times.stop_id` since it is a required field. Because of this, you had to use a "dummy" id in `stop_times.stop_id` which, the v2 drafting community decided, was worse than just having `stop_times.stop_id` able to reference ids from multiple files.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 5: But naming conventions are important. Can't the field name be changed to something less confusing?

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 4: We cannot change `stop_times.stop_id`, as that is part of the core GTFS standard.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 5: To me it looks like a breaking change anyway, because until now stop_times.stop_id was referencing only stops.stop_id. If you allow anything else here (as this change does) then it's a breaking change, in which case it could also be renamed. Or if you want to be semi backwards compatible then you still could add a new field with some better name, and add to stop_id and the new field that they are conditionally forbidden and only one of them can be defined. This would enable current producers to continue to produce their feed with stop_id (with only referencing stop_ids) OR use the new field instead if they also want to reference areas and/or locations.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 4: I do not think it is a breaking change to add to what a field can reference. If you have established that A can reference X, there is no contradiction to later say A can *also* reference Y and Z.

> This would enable current producers to continue to produce their feed with stop_id (with only referencing stop_ids) OR use the new field instead if they also want to reference areas and/or locations.

I do not see how this is an advantage for producers.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Reviewer 2: I accept Gavriel's point about this being a little difficult to model in a relational database but I don't believe that it must be the goal of the spec to make it so.

I also agree that using the name "stop_location" (which we do in our internal model) would have been preferable if this was part of the first iteration of GTFS ~15 years ago.

However, given that GTFS has no versions and pretty ironclad backwards-compatibility guarantees, I think using stop_id rather than introducing a new field is the least bad solution given the constraints that we face. For my part, I have been consuming the stop_id that refers to three different types of entities for years and it has not given me any issues that are worse than all the other problems that exist when you mix static and flexible transit data.

Having said that, I would be open to do a consensus finding exercise to figure out what the community thinks.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that I don't want to dismiss Gavriel's points but rather argue that GTFS is in many ways highly pragmatic which _does_ lead these kinds of design decisions. On balance, I think I'm happier with this approach compared to what other standards follow which say that they follow more "robust" engineering principles.

> | `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` or `id` from `locations.geojson` | **Required** | Identifies a stop or GeoJSON location. If a station (i.e. a stop with `stops.location_type=1`) is defined in this field, it is assumed that all of its platforms (i.e. all stops with `stops.location_type=0` that have this station defined as `stops.parent_station`) are part of the same area. This behavior can be overridden by assigning platforms to other areas. |

Author: Re: [this comment](https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388#discussion_r1269923819)
Restriction added https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/04503319f90bf5a161057e09e72bb5e9fd76d594, thanks!

| `prior_notice_start_time` | Time | **Conditionally Required** | Earliest time on the earliest day before travel to make the booking request.<br><br>Example: “Ride can be booked at the earliest one week in advance at midnight” will be encoded as `prior_notice_start_time=00:00:00`.<br><br>**Conditionally Required**:<br>- **Required** if `prior_notice_start_day` is defined.<br>- **Forbidden** otherwise. |
| `prior_notice_service_id` | ID referencing `calendar.service_id` | **Conditionally Forbidden** | Indicates the service days on which `prior_notice_last_day` or `prior_notice_start_day` are counted. <br><br>Example: If empty, `prior_notice_start_day=2` will be two calendar days in advance. If defined as a `service_id` containing only business days (weekdays without holidays), `prior_notice_start_day=2` will be two business days in advance.<br><br>**Conditionally Forbidden**:<br> - Optional if `booking_type=2`. <br> - **Forbidden** otherwise. |

> | `message` | Text | Optional | Message to riders utilizing service at a `stop_time` when booking on-demand pickup and drop off. Meant to provide minimal information to be transmitted within a user interface about the action a rider must take in order to utilize the service. |

Reviewer 5: what about translations?

| `pickup_message` | Text | Optional | Functions in the same way as `message` but used when riders have on-demand pickup only. |
| `drop_off_message` | Text | Optional | Functions in the same way as `message` but used when riders have on-demand drop off only. |

> | `phone_number` | Phone number | Optional | Phone number to call to make the booking request. |

Reviewer 5: Maybe a good idea to require full international format? I.e: instead of 01234567 +331234567 Makes it easier for international users (travellers)

Author: For `booking_rules.phone_number`:
Could it be something "recommended" instead of "required"? (More like a best practice approach)

Reviewer 4: Given that there is a phone number field that exists elsewhere in the core spec, defining a best practice for number format should be discussed outside of this PR (but this PR shouldn't be contingent on that discussion since it would be a question of general best practice/"recommended" for a certain field type as opposed to specific field requirements).

Author: Issue created - https://github.com/google/transit/issues/392

|  `level_index` | Float | **Required** | Numeric index of the level that indicates its relative position. <br><br>Ground level should have index `0`, with levels above ground indicated by positive indices and levels below ground by negative indices.|
|  `level_name` | Text | Optional | Name of the level as seen by the rider inside the building or station.<hr>_Example: Take the elevator to "Mezzanine" or "Platform" or "-1"._|

### location_groups.txt

File: **Optional**

Primary key (`location_group_id`, `location_id`)

Defines location groups that indicate groups of stops where a rider may request pickup or drop off.

| Field Name | Type | Required | Description |
| ---------- | ---- | ------------ | ----------- |

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br> By default, every `stop_id` belongs to a `location_group_id` of the same value. Therefore, it is forbidden to define a `location_group_id` with the same value as a `stop_id`.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Reviewer 4: I recommend removing "By default, every `stop_id` belongs to a `location_group_id` of the same value. Therefore, it is forbidden to define a `location_group_id` with the same value as a `stop_id`."

We no longer need to establish this restriction since they do not share the `stop_times.stop_id` field anymore.

Author: Commit pushed - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/6314252ed5c422e6d229654dfac282a3c5ca0ce3
Thanks!

| `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Required** | Identifies a stop belonging to the location group. |
| `location_group_name` | Text | Optional | Name of the location group. Must be defined either once, or exhaustively for a single `location_group_id`. |

### locations.geojson

File: **Optional**

Defines GeoJSON locations that indicate groups of lat/lon coordinates defining zones where riders can request either pickup or drop off.
- This file uses a subset of the GeoJSON format, described in [RFC 7946](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7946).
- The `locations.geojson` file must contain a `FeatureCollection`.
- A `FeatureCollection` defines various stop locations where riders may request pickup or drop off.

> - Every GeoJSON `Feature` must have an `id`. The `id` belongs to the same namespace as `stop_id` in `stops.txt` and `location_group_id` in `location_groups.txt`.

Reviewer 4: Clarifying question: "belongs to the same namespace"–what exactly is this saying? That `id` has the same relation to `locations.geojson` as `stop_id` does to `stops.txt` [etc.], or is it establishing a shared "pool" of ids that cannot be duplicative?

If it's the latter, I believe we can remove this language, now that we have dedicated `stop_times.txt` fields for each.

@tsherlockcraig Do you have any insight on this?

- Every GeoJSON `Feature` should have objects and associated keys according to the table below:

|  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |
|  ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -&nbsp;`type` | String | **Required** | `"FeatureCollection"` of locations. |
| -&nbsp;`features` | Array | **Required** | Collection of `"Feature"` objects describing the locations. |
| &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;\-&nbsp;`type` | String | **Required** | `"Feature"` |

> | &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;\-&nbsp;`id` | String | **Required** | Location ID belonging to the same namespace as `stops.stop_id`. |

Reviewer 4: I'm still unsure how helpful these "namespace" statements actually are or if they just add more confusion. If it's decided to remove that language, maybe in it's place we can say some thing like "Primary Key for referencing GeoJSON locations of on-demand services." ...?

Would love to hear other folks' thoughts on the "namespace" language.

Author: I don't know what the original mean of "namespace" here, but now it seems more like a confusion than clarification to me.

I'd prefer to remove or alter this if we can't elaborate the meaning here.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps one of the original drafters of the Flex v2 doc can shed some light.

Reviewer 2: I think we should modify the language to say something like "the id for a stop, location and location_group must be used only once even these entity types".

Reviewer 2: I'm straining to find some language that is both compact and unambiguous. Not sure if the above is clear enough.

Reviewer 4: > I think we should modify the language to say something like "the id for a stop, location and location_group must be used only once even across these entity types".

Except isn't this an unnecessary restriction now that location `id` and `location_group_id` have their own foreign key column in stop_times.txt?

Reviewer 2: In our implementation at least they are de-normalised into the same base type `StopLocation` and there are many implementations of them. I'm pretty sure that something would break if you gave a location and a stop the same ID.

One implementation's inner workings isn't a good argument for a spec requirement but to me it makes sense to make the ID of "things where a vehicle can stop" unique across all entity types so that you can be agnostic to the precise implementation in APIs.

Reviewer 2: If this were not the case, then we would have to prefix all `StopLocation` ids with their type which is even more confusing to API consumers.

Reviewer 4: That makes sense @leonardehrenfried, I am on board.

In that case, I believe this language is the clearest: "...must be unique across all `stop_id`, locations.GeoJSON `id`, and `location_group_id` values."

Author: Thanks @leonardehrenfried @westontrillium 
https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/7d10ffa97add72e49974cad95fbc620229885bcc

> | &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;\-&nbsp;`id` | String | **Required** | Location ID belonging to the same namespace as `stops.stop_id`. It is forbidden to define an `id` from `locations.geojson` with the same value as a `stops.stop_id` or a `location_groups.location_group_id`.|

Reviewer 4: I recommend removing "It is forbidden to define an `id` from `locations.geojson` with the same value as a `stops.stop_id` or a `location_groups.location_group_id`."

We no longer need to establish this restriction since they do not share the stop_times.stop_id field anymore.

Reviewer 4: Also, see my comment on line 648 regarding "namespace" language.

Author: Commit pushed - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/6314252ed5c422e6d229654dfac282a3c5ca0ce3
Thanks!

|  `level_index` | Float | **Required** | Numeric index of the level that indicates its relative position. <br><br>Ground level should have index `0`, with levels above ground indicated by positive indices and levels below ground by negative indices.|
|  `level_name` | Text | Optional | Name of the level as seen by the rider inside the building or station.<hr>_Example: Take the elevator to "Mezzanine" or "Platform" or "-1"._|

### location_groups.txt

File: **Optional**

Primary key (`location_group_id`, `location_id`)

> Defines location groups that indicate groups of stops where a rider may request pickup or drop off.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @abyrd's wording change suggestion with @tzujenchanmbd's adjustment of "in on-demand service." "location_group" was the original name because one could include geojson locations as well as stops. I agree it's not perfect, but I prefer keeping it as-is for the following reasons:
1. The word "location" has broader application which is convenient if there is potential to add other "location" types to the file if a use case is discovered.
2. I don't think "location" is inaccurate for a file that only references stops either; in the spec, stops are called "locations" and even have associated `location_types`.
3.  In my opinion, including the word "stop" in the file name causes more confusion considering there are more instances of that word elsewhere in the spec: `stop_areas.txt`, `stop_times.txt`, `stops.txt`, not to mention all the field names with the word "stop." `stop_areas.txt` is an especially important case because it actually has the same relational function as location_groups, only for a different component of the spec (fares). Imagine having two files named `stop_areas.txt` and `stop_groups.txt` that are **nearly functionally identical**, but meant for different purposes.

> Defines location groups that indicate groups of stops where a rider may request pickup or drop off.

Reviewer 3: > Not sure about `flex_stop_groups` since we currently don't use the term "flex" in the spec proposal. 
See comment below:
https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388#discussion_r1419896819
I am not insisting on the specific term "flex" (though it's short and distinct), just pointing out that prefixing/namespacing entity types that reference each other within a single coherent spec extension could be very useful.

| Field Name | Type | Required | Description |
| ---------- | ---- | ------------ | ----------- |

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Reviewer 3: Wording here could be confusing. This says the location_group_id must be unique "across all values" in three files, but then says multiple records in this file (rows in this table) may have the same location_group_id. To create a useful group, of course multiple rows in this table must reference the same location_group_id (the key for an implicit location_group entity that is not materialized in a table) but the keys of those implicit location_groups share a namespace with the primary keys of two other tables. The situation is unusual enough that wording will be important to avoid confusing people with more conventional data modeling expectations.

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Author: Adding something probably relevant here, would love to hear other folks' thoughts.

In our last working group meeting, it was decided to move the table defining stop groups from being shared with fares v2 in `stop_areas.txt` back to using a dedicated file `location_groups.txt`. However, their mechanisms differ:

`stop_areas.txt` has a companion, `areas.txt`. `stop_areas` only assign stops to areas, and multiple entries in `stop_areas` can have the same `area_id`, without including any attributes. The `area_id` in `areas.txt` is a unique ID, and areas.txt contains attributes like `area_name`. When other tables reference the `area_id`, they reference `areas.area_id` rather than `stop_areas.area_id`.

However, the current `location_groups.txt` combines both "grouping" and "indicating attributes" within a single table.

What if we introduce a file similar to `areas.txt` for `location_groups.txt`? This could:
- Ensure a mechanism similar to existing `stop_areas`- `areas` and `route_networks` - `networks` in GTFS (even though they serve different purposes).
- Avoid duplicating values for attributes (such as location_group_name) within a single `location_groups` file.
- **Perhaps alleviate concerns raised in [this comment](https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388#discussion_r1416728745)? (Because the IDs in the new file would be unique ID.)**

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Reviewer 4: > Wording here could be confusing. This says the location_group_id must be unique "across all values" in three files, but then says multiple records in this file (rows in this table) may have the same location_group_id. To create a useful group, of course multiple rows in this table must reference the same location_group_id, which can be seen as the key for an implicit location_group entity that is not materialized in a table. The primary keys of those implicit location_groups then share a namespace with the primary keys of two other tables. The situation is unusual enough that wording will be important to avoid confusing people with more conventional data modeling expectations.

This wording was recently changed to be clearer than it was before. Suggestions to further improve the wording would definitely be welcome! The main point is we want to communicate here is that `stop_id`s, location.geojson `id`s, and `location_group_id`s cannot share the same value (e.g., a `stop_id` and location `id` cannot both equal `abc123`). In the case of `location_group_id`, multiple instances of a given `location_group_id` in location_groups.txt indicate that both those records are within a single location_group.

Regarding the rest:

From a producer perspective, it is more laborious to have to maintain single location groups using **two** files. I'll have to take your word that this feature deviates from conventional structuring of data, but Flex as a spec itself deviates from convention, to use @leonardehrenfried's words, these considerations are the easy part of implementing Flex. We really could spend an endless amount of time iterating components of the spec like this, but at the end of the day, consumers will still need to contend with the bigger challenge of implementing flexible routing. But I still wonder if the two file approach is less complex for a consumer and if mitigating that complexity outweighs the increased complexity for producers? To my knowledge, no Flex consumer since Flex v2's publication over three years ago has ever raised this as an inherent issue of location groups. Yes, areas/stop_areas.txt was momentarily used instead, but for the sole reason of reducing redundancy of file functionality, not because it used two files.

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Author: A potential risk for producers could be that if this file includes more attributes in the future, it will require more repetitive values for these attributes. (Just raising a "potential" risk here, not strongly suggesting two separate files)

Also curious about how this is perceived from the consumer's standpoint.

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Reviewer 4: The spec as it is currently written addresses repetitive values with the following language for `location_group_name`: "Must be defined either once, or exhaustively for a single location_group_id." Is this a sufficient solution?

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Author: Ah you are right, I didn't notice that. 
Yes then this won't be a risk for producers.

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Reviewer 3: > In our last working group meeting, it was decided to move the table defining stop groups from being shared with fares v2 in `stop_areas.txt` back to using a dedicated file `location_groups.txt`.

This could be justified just on the basis of them being different optional, self-contained spec extensions. Again I'm thinking about gtfs-components here. The way GTFS and its spec are broken into modules or components would need to be finalized before it would be clear if this is sufficient reason to have separate tables.

> `stop_areas.txt` has a companion, `areas.txt`. `stop_areas` only assign stops to areas, and multiple entries in `stop_areas` can have the same `area_id`, without including any attributes. The `area_id` in `areas.txt` is a unique ID, and areas.txt contains attributes like `area_name`. When other tables reference the `area_id`, they reference `areas.area_id` rather than `stop_areas.area_id`.

Something like `areas.txt` you are describing here is what I meant in my other comments by "materializing" the implicit location_groups in a table. This seems like a normalized relational model. As such it will be readily approachable and easier to grasp for many people. Arguably, it's not just "easier", but it only becomes possible to validate and reason about clearly when it adheres to certain principles. 

Just to be sure: the values appearing in `areas.area_id` and those in `stop_areas.area_id` are drawn from exactly the same set of values right? The set is just defined by the unique values in `areas`, then those same values are referenced in `stop_areas`? In standard terminology, they are the primary keys of `areas` and foreign keys in `stop_areas`? If so yes, this makes sense to me (though I find the naming of the tables a bit odd, something like `area_stops` seems more conventional).

This fare-oriented area-of-stops structure does seem very similar to the one that would be needed in flex routing though, so it is certainly worth asking if you need/want separate tables for the two. Strict componentization of GTFS seems like the main justification. If the attributes of areas/zones/groups are expected to remain identical for the fare and flex use cases, they can just share the tables. If the cases are (even potentially) divergent enough they can have different tables, at the cost of making the spec more complex but more modular.

> However, the current `location_groups.txt` combines both "grouping" and "indicating attributes" within a single table.

Right, it seems like a denormalized form of the fare-oriented area-of-stops.

> What if we introduce a file similar to `areas.txt` for `location_groups.txt`? 

This would not only be more consistent with other parts of GTFS (other "gtfs-components" you could say), it would be more consistent with decades of practice and theory underpinning databases and data modeling. Not necessarily introduce a file, but at least introduce the abstract entity (see below).

> * **Perhaps alleviate concerns raised in [this comment](https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388#discussion_r1416728745)? (Because the IDs in the new file would be unique ID.)**

Yes, I meant that the wording is probably confusing because the data model does not enable it to be clear. Changing some words in the description wouldn't change the structure they're trying to describe. Introducing distinct types/tables and normalizing the data (i.e. factoring redundant data or implicit entities out into their own tables) might allow for wording that is less confusing to the reader because it is able to refer more closely to the structure of the data in the files people see in front of them. On the other hand, if there aren't any redundant attributes to be factored out into this new table (in this case, the flex equivalent of fare-oriented areas) other than the IDs, you could elect to not materialize it. But in that case the entity *still exists in the model*, and should still be described in the documentation, it is just elided from the physical tables in the feed for convenience of feed producers (though It's debatable how convenient that is if they already have the table in their software). To be specific, you can say "There is this entity called a location_group, and each one has an ID that is unique among all location_groups, stops, and locations. However, these entities have no properties of their own, so they currently don't need a table. They're implicitly instantiated by reference from foreign keys in location_groups.txt." or to drop the jargon, "created when someone references their ID in this other table". 

Of course I still think renaming these things makes sense. The table location_groups would more rightly be the flex equivalent of your fare-oriented areas, and a table called something like location_group_stops would then associate stops to location_groups. In my opinion this all gets much less confusing if the tables are called flex_zones and flex_zone_stops. And even less confusing if you also have consistent naming with fare_areas and fare_area_stops.

I want to emphasize that I'm not making this stuff up as I go along or asking people to adopt "my way". I am just trying to describe standard data modeling and database design as practiced and refined for the last 50 years and taught in every computer science curriculum. It's founded in mathematics and decades of reasoning, not my personal opinion. Anything I say here may be flawed, and should be confronted with this standard practice and theory.

People with any background in data modeling or databases are already performing this mental transform into clear, standard language every time they read the spec. It's not so bad to convert the language, but it can get really frustrating when the underlying structure is too idiosyncratic or ad-hoc.

> | `location_group_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location group. ID must be unique across all `stops.stop_id`, locations.geojson `id`, and `location_groups.location_group_id` values. <br><br>A location group is a group of stops that together indicate locations where a rider may request pickup or drop off.<br><br>Multiple entries in `location_groups.txt` can have the same `location_group_id`. | 

Author: "Materialized" implicit location_group in a separate file - `location_groups.txt` - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/5e22e1062c2802ce591722e8c47559f011de3ca0

Resolving this conversation.

| `stop_id` | Foreign ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Required** | Identifies a stop belonging to the location group. |
| `location_group_name` | Text | Optional | Name of the location group. Must be defined either once, or exhaustively for a single `location_group_id`. |

### locations.geojson

File: **Optional**

> Defines GeoJSON locations that indicate groups of lat/lon coordinates defining zones where riders can request either pickup or drop off.

Reviewer 3: Wording here could also be confusing. The definition feels a bit circular: "Locations... defines... locations that indicate groups." Including more of the sentence, this can be condensed to "Locations defines groups... defining zones", which can be further condensed to "Locations define zones".  Is it then fair to say that these locations are just zones? I realize terms stick around for historical reasons, but at this point in the evolution of the spec, would it make more sense to just call these "zones" or "flex_zones"? 

I think there's also the consistency issue I mentioned in another comment, where currently location_groups are not in fact groups of locations. 

Do "groups of lat/lon coordiantes" refer to the interior of the polygons, or to the points defining the perimeter of the polygon? In either case these seem to be details of how the zones are represented or defined, and not the nature of the entities themselves. I believe they're just zone polygons.

```suggestion
Defines zones where riders can request either pickup or drop off by flex services. These zones are represented as GeoJSON polygons.
```

Reviewer 4: Agree with the suggested wording change for line 645.

Reviewer 3: The above comment https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388#discussion_r1417750416 also applies here: the term "flex" doesn't seem to be used in the spec, so some other expression like "on-demand" might be used. 

However, "flex" is clearly a distinct idea in the minds of people drafting the spec, which seems to be intended as a single coherent extension to the spec, and introduces new entities that are specific to this extension and this kind of transportation. It introduces elements that many people will never use, and other people will need to focus on as a specific domain in data pipelines or routing. Both groups need to be able to mentally categorize the growing number of entity types, understand readily which tables "go together" and which ones they need to examine or ignore depending on their use case. To meet those needs, it seems reasonable to qualify the names of new entities with the extension or specific kind of transportation they relate to. This could be done with a prefix, preferably a short memorable one that matches the term used in the proposal or other documents. `flex_` seems like a pretty good candidate to me.

My main point here though was that these may only called "locations" for historical reasons, and it may have long-term benefit to settle on names that better reflect the current role of the entities before the extension is formally adopted. Chains of definitions were built up to say that "locations" are actually geographic polygons that people call "zones" in this kind of transit. In that case, is there any reason they aren't just called "zones"? And if "zones" might be too general because there are also things like "fare zones", then aren't these just on-demand zones or "flex_zones"? That's a nice, short name that says exactly what the table contains and clearly groups it with other tables and concepts only used in on-demand or flex routing, and with proposals and documents pertaining to on-demand or flex routing.

Reviewer 4: I’m hearing you on a lot of your points @abyrd. The volume of commentary here makes it difficult to respond in writing comprehensively, and doing so would only make it harder for other readers to track discussion. As such, I suggest we discuss these topics at the next Flex meeting. @tzujenchanmbd 

I see two main issues you’ve raised:
1. Should we rework location_groups.txt to include normalization of location_groups in a separate file (similar structure to areas/stop_areas)?
  e.g., location_groups.txt + location_group_stops.txt (assuming naming convention remains the same)
2. Should we rework naming convention of location_groups.txt and maybe locations.geojson and use something like “flex_groups.txt (+ flex_group_stops.txt)” and “flex_zones.geojson”?

Does that sound right?

Reviewer 3: To that I would add:
a) Rather than just prefixing extension names, consider completely renaming entities to narrow meaning and resolve contradictions (e.g. location_groups are not made of locations) (this may already be implied in your point 2)
b) Extend table naming scheme uniformly to other proposals and tables, e.g.: `extension_entity[_subentity]`
c) Consider introducing additional entities or "superclasses" to the specification that coherently capture why different tables share an ID namespace. e.g. flex routes reference a stop-like entity class that encompass normal stops, but also a couple of other things. These do not need to be materialized in tables, but their existence in the specification and description could make it much easier to understand.

Note that I will probably not be able to attend any meetings on this topic. But please feel free to take my commentary into consideration when working on next steps at any planned meeting.  

I think more so than written vs. spoken communication, there are other aspects of the change proposal and adoption process that impede clear understanding and discussion. But I hope to raise those points on a new issue or #413, not on this pre-existing proposal.

Reviewer 3: I just added #415 which I think relates to the discussion above.

Author: Just quickly answer some questions here -
> Just to be sure: the values appearing in areas.area_id and those in stop_areas.area_id are drawn from exactly the same set of values right? The set is just defined by the unique values in areas, then those same values are referenced in stop_areas? In standard terminology, they are the primary keys of areas and foreign keys in stop_areas?

Yes.

> The volume of commentary here makes it difficult to respond in writing comprehensively, and doing so would only make it harder for other readers to track discussion. As such, I suggest we discuss these topics at the next Flex meeting.

We are planning a meeting, and will announce more details (such as the date and link) shortly.

Author: Modified locations.geojson file description - https://github.com/google/transit/pull/388/commits/1419292118398bf9388f707e882d468a30839d6e

Field name discussed in the 1/17 meeting, resolving this conversation.
